---
title : A case study in large-scale networks: Freebase.com
layout: project
article: /pdfs/freebase_socialgraph/writeup.pdf 
slides: /pdfs/freebase_socialgraph/presentation.pdf
---

Over the last 20 years, large-scale networks have become more and more prominent. Much of this can be attributed to the rise of the internet which has made possible the formation of formal social networks. Before the rise of these large-scale networks, most analysis of graphs relied on being able to draw pictures of graphs. The human brain has an amazing ability to describe structure based on graphical representation. However, there is often no practical way to visualize large-scale networks with millions of nodes and edges.

Freebase.com is an open database of the world's information. Unlike most relational databases which represent data in tables, the Freebase data form a labelled directed graph. Topics, such as people, places, or things are represented as nodes and edges express the relationships between them. Unlike many databases, Freebase aims to be comprehensive without duplicating topics. For example, Arnold Schwarzenegger can be found in body building databases as well as political databases, but in Freebase, Arnold is one entity with links to his body-building awards as well as his political positions.

In many ways, we can expect Freebase to have a similar structure to large-scale social networks because they both represent historical interactions between topics. However, there are likely to be some key differences. Social networks grow organically as friendships are formed, but most of the data in Freebase has been bulk loaded by the employees of Metaweb Technologies. Freebase is also in a very early stage of development and many topics have only a handful of outgoing links, and a considerable number have none at all. This paper examines two ma jor statistical techniques for analyzing large-scale graphs: degree distribution and clustering coefficient.