---
layout: post
title : A Trillion Here, A Trillion There, and Pretty Soon You're Talking Real Money
location: Claremont
note: This article was originally written as an Op-Ed for a Politics and Journalism class.
---

Today's headlines are littered with staggering sums of money: a trillion dollar spending bill, multi-hundred billion dollar bailouts, million dollar executive bonuses. As the numbers fly across the television screen, they start to blur together and become merely figures on a page. It's hard for the average person to conceive of more than a few billion of anything, the number of people on the planet.

Rubik's Cubes have long been advertised as having "billions of combinations, only one solution." In fact, a Rubik's Cube can be arranged into approximately 43 quintillion different combinations. The advertiser's claim is technically true since a Rubik's Cube does have billions of combinations, but it also has many more, just as *War and Peace* does contain 200 pages, but it also contains over 1000 more pages. As a math student, I find this claim very misleading, but this understatement is fairly innocuous because customers are left with the impression that they will not have a chance to explore even a tiny fraction of the combinations, which is true regardless of whether there are billions or quintillions of combinations.

David Schwartz is a children's author who wrote *How Much Is a Million?* He likes to explain the difference between a million, a billion, and a trillion in terms of seconds. He explains,
>One million seconds comes out to be about 11 1/2 days. A billion seconds is 32 years and a trillion seconds is 32,000 years. I like to say that I have a pretty good idea what I'll be doing a million seconds from now, no idea what I'll be doing a billion seconds from now, and an excellent idea what I'll be doing a trillion seconds from now.
By conveying quantities on a scale humans can relate to, Schwartz can demonstrate the enormous gap between a thousand, a million and a billion.

In an effort to illustrate the unprecedented magnitude President Obama's stimulus package, critics have tried to explain it in terms of everyday items. Senator John Thune explained that 1 trillion one dollar bills could be stacked 689 miles high, or they could be placed end-to-end to wrap around the  planet 39 times. This type of comparison is useless because the figure is way beyond human scale and does not illustrate the actual economic value, or lack thereof, of the spending.

John Allen Paulos, a Temple University mathematician, has long been disturbed by the average person's lack of grasp on large numbers and other simple mathematical ideas. In his 1988 book, *Innumeracy*, Paulos proposes a few simple ways to improve the general public's knowledge and understanding of mathematics. He argues that the first step is to make people familiar with the scale of numbers using real world examples that people encounter in their daily lives. No one is going to come across a stack of bills more than a few inches high, but they can visualize the 50,000 seats in Dodger Stadium, or the 100,000 words in an average length novel. They might even have some notion of a few billion, the number of humans on the planet. But past this point, relevant real world examples are far and few between.

In order to understand larger numbers, he proposes that news organizations adopt scientific notation. Scientists and mathematicians use scientific notation to express numbers of any magnitude in a concise and easy-to-read format. Despite the name, there's nothing particularly hard about it. It's certainly less complicated than many other concepts the media tries to explain, such as derivatives markets. 10<sup>N</sup> is simply 1 with $N$ zeroes following it. So 10<sup>3</sup> is one thousand, 10<sup>6</sup> is one million and 10<sup>9</sup> is one billion. We can, of course, express other, not so round numbers. For example, $218 million, the total of the AIG bonus payments is $2.18 &times; 10<sup>6</sup>$dollars and $61.7 billion, the size of the taxpayer bailout of AIG, is $6.17 &times; 10<sup>10</sup>$ dollars. 

Scientific notation allows us to easily compare the orders of magnitude of any two quantities. By subtracting the exponents, we see that the bonuses are about 5 orders of magnitude smaller than the bailout, or about one part in ten thousand.

In order to understand the cost of these fantastically expensive programs, it is useful to compare them to other government programs. In 2008, the National Institutes of Health, which funds most non-Defense related scientific research in the U.S., had a budget of $28.8 billion or $2.88 &times; 10<sup>10</sup>$ dollars. In other words, the federal government invests $96 dollars in health care research for each of the 3 &times; 10^8 persons in the United States. TARP has an allocated budget of up to 7 &times; 10<sup>11</sup> dollars, or $2333 for every person. By presenting the numbers in human terms, it becomes clear that the federal government is spending much more on bank bailouts than on medical research. Unlike the Rubik's Cube advertisement, the difference is highly relevant because we will be paying off today's spending for years to come.

